---
layout: post
---

## Introduction

Welcome, dear readers, to a journey of self-discovery and inner transformation.
In this article, I invite you to join me as I recount my profound experience
during a 10-day Vipassana meditation retreat under the guidance of Padma Bhushan
S.N. Goenka. Together, we'll explore the depths of silence and introspection,
uncovering the timeless wisdom that resides within each of us.

## A bit of history

I've been meditating since a young age, initially informally taught in my
school. We would collectively sit in silence, using our breath as the focal
point, for five minutes before classes began each day. In the 6th grade, I began
meditating regularly at home, using a candle lamp as my point of focus from 6:30
pm to 7 pm. This practice continued until my 11th grade.

During my college years, however, meditation took a backseat in my life, and the
habit eventually faded away. It wasn't until a few years ago that I reignited my
meditation journey after attending an online course by Sadhguru Jaggi Vasudev,
which introduced me to Kriya Yoga techniques. While I found these techniques
beneficial, I wasn't fully aligned with Sadhguru's blending of Kriya Yoga and
Bhakti techniques, given my upbringing in a Hindu family where I had performed
and attended rituals with my current rational mind, I wasn't convinced by the
Bhakti path.

My perspective shifted when I encountered Dr. Daniel Ingram's book, [Mastering the
Core Teachings of the Buddha](https://www.mctb.org/)[^1], which offered a practical approach to
enlightenment without mysticism. Inspired, I delved into the techniques outlined
in his book, embarking on self-retreats intermittently for several months until
I reached a stage known as the Dark Night, which I'll delve into in future and I
took a long break which regressed my progress.

Realizing the need for formal, in-person meditation training, I sought out
Insight meditation retreats in the Theravada tradition, free from sectarian
beliefs and dogmas. Dan recommended
[Tattagatha](https://www.tathagata.org/retreats) in San Jose, California, which
caught my attention, offering 60-day retreats. I couldn't find a way to
give 60 days time commitment.

Then, I stumbled upon a [10 day retreat by SN Goenka](https://dhamma.org/),
advertised as non-sectarian. Intrigued, I booked my spot a couple of months in
advance, eager to immerse myself in this transformative experience.

## Day 0: Arrival and Silence

Upon arriving at the meditation center in Kelseyville, California, on Day Zero,
we were instructed to surrender our phones, wallets, and all personal
belongings. Stripped of distractions, it was just me and my breath, embarking on
a ten-day journey of self-discovery akin to that of a sanyasi.

Despite experiencing severe jet lag from my return trip from Singapore the
previous day, I was determined to navigate this challenge. The retreat began
with the imposition of Noble silence, a practice not of inherent nobility but
observed by those traversing the noble path of yoga. We dined promptly by 6:45
pm and convened for the evening discourse at 7 pm, where we were briefed on the
Five Precepts, noble silence being one of them.

Our daily routine commenced with a 4 am wake-up call, followed by meditation in
our rooms at 4:30 am. Throughout the day, we engaged in meditation sessions
until 9 pm, punctuated by breaks. Mandatory sits were scheduled thrice daily in
the meditation hall: from 8-9 am, 2:30-3:30 pm, and 6-7 pm.

Meals adhered to a simple schedule: breakfast from 6:30-7:15 am, lunch from
11-11:45 am, and dinner from 5-5:30 pm. The agenda was straightforward: ten
hours of meditation daily for ten consecutive days. It was the exact intensity I
had sought, a crucible for inner transformation.

## Days 1 to 2: The Battle with the Monkey

On Day 1, despite setting my alarm for 4:00 am, I naturally woke up at 3:59 am.
It felt like the universe was aligning with my intentions. After a bracing cold
shower, I dove straight into meditation at 4:30 am. My mind, ever the wanderer,
whisked me away to both real and imaginary realms. This pattern persisted during
the 8-hour meditation sessions throughout the day, but gradually, my mind began
to find its footing.

By Day 2, each breath became my anchor. Focusing solely on the breath came
easier, yet it was accompanied by an overwhelming sense of monotony.
Nonetheless, I persisted, much like the fellow practitioners surrounding me.
It's a challenge to remain motionless for extended periods, especially for ten
hours a day. I found myself constantly adjusting my posture, compounded by the
lingering effects of jet lag. But through it all, I reassured myself that this
discomfort was temporary, a passing phase on the path to inner growth.

## Day 3: Narrowing the region of attention

On Day 3, our focus shifted to the region below the nostrils and above the upper
lips, and I noticed a significant improvement in my ability to concentrate. This
sharpening of the mind came as a welcome development, even though maintaining
this focus throughout the day proved to be a formidable challenge. My body began
to exhibit signs of fatigue, prompting thoughts about the curriculum for the
remaining days. Despite my dwindling energy, I remained undeterred, determined
to persevere.

However, the chanting during our meditation sessions presented a cultural hurdle
for me. The language used, Hindi, felt discordant to my ears, with the tune
resembling a mourning chant rather than the peaceful, energizing chants I was
accustomed to in Sanskrit and Tamil. Nonetheless, I resolved to remain
open-minded and focused on my personal journey of self-discovery.

## Day 4: Vipashana and persistence

On Day 4, the practice evolved as we were instructed to observe sensations
across different parts of the body, from the crown of the head to the soles of
the feet, while discerning the three characteristics inherent in each sensation.
This approach resonated with me, as I had encountered these principles
previously in MCTB. The task was clear: methodically observe each part of
the body, honing in on the impermanence, unsatisfactoriness, and selflessness
present in every sensation. Whether experiencing a pleasant sensation akin to
electric pulse-like vibrations or an unpleasant one such as itch, tingle, sweat,
or burn, the goal was to observe them without bias. This meant cultivating
equanimity by neither craving the pleasant nor averting from the unpleasant.

For me, this approach felt natural, as I consciously rejected the notion of
categorizing sensations as either pleasant or unpleasant. Instead, I embraced
each sensation with equal acceptance, allowing for a deeper understanding of the
impermanent and selfless nature of all phenomena.

## Day 5: Reflections

On Day 5, the meditation instructions took a new direction, prompting us to
observe sensations from bottom to top and then alternating between top to bottom
and bottom to top. While we were prohibited from taking notes post sits, a
practice advocated by Dan in his book, I found value in reflecting on each
session afterward. This post-sit reflection allowed me to gauge the
effectiveness of my practice and identify areas for improvement. By remaining
focused and introspective in this way, I not only stayed on track but also made
significant strides along the path of self-discovery and calmness with my mind.

## Days 6 to 8: Equanimity

During the meditation sessions, we delved into full-body scans, sweeping and
massing sensations, before returning to the meticulous observation of individual
body parts. Through this process, profound insights began to surface. I found
myself realizing the impermanence inherent in every sensation, leading to a
deepening sense of equanimity. Pain and pleasure transformed into mere transient
phenomena, no longer holding sway over my consciousness as I observed them
equanimously.

In my quest for understanding, I sought to discern dissatisfaction and the
absence of self in each sensation, drawing upon insights gleaned from past
self-retreats prior to the Dark Night. However, this time, I encountered
difficulty in realizing these truths. Despite my knowledge and prior experiences
pointing towards the non-existence of self, I struggled to witness it firsthand.

In parallel I was struggling with back ache in my middle and upper spine due to
long sits. By now I had tried padmasanaa, sidhasana, vajraasanaa[^2] and I know
there's no magic on the floor. All of them yielded nothing but pain.

[![](https://img.youtube.com/vi/996afHNbbG0/default.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=996afHNbbG0)

Persisting in my inquiry, I reached a pivotal realization: I had been neglecting
a crucial aspect of practice - relaxation and smiling, as taught by Bante
Vimalaramsi in his Metta meditation. As I embraced the relax and smile technique
wholeheartedly, a profound shift occurred. Suddenly, I experienced a profound
disassociation of the self from sensations, marking a significant milestone in
my journey of self-discovery and realization.

## Day 9: Persistence

On Day 9, despite my best efforts, I continued to grapple with the search for
dissatisfaction within sensations. Although I attempted to implement relaxation
and smiling techniques, it seemed my efforts fell short. Dissatisfaction
remained elusive, stubbornly resisting my scrutiny.

However, a significant shift occurred during the evening session on Day 9 when
the noble silence was relaxed, allowing the ten-day practitioners to interact
freely. Meeting fellow practitioners, I was struck by the warmth and camaraderie
among us. As conversations flowed and experiences were shared, I found myself
observing the construction of the self-identity within my mind as I engaged in
these interactions. It was a fascinating insight into the workings of the mind
and the role of social interaction in shaping our sense of self.

Reflecting on my experience, I couldn't help but compare it to the occasional
one-day silent retreats, known as Mouna Vratam, practiced at home. While those
brief periods of silence were beneficial, the profound stillness and tranquility
experienced during nine consecutive days of noble silence were unparalleled. It
was a truly blissful and enriching experience, deepening my understanding of the
self and the power of silence in fostering inner peace.

## Day 10: Loving Kindness

The introduction of loving-kindness meditation, known as Metta in Pali language,
marked a significant departure from the Vipassana technique I had been immersed
in. While Metta was not new to me, having practiced it before under the guidance
of Bante, its inclusion in the retreat was presented as a soothing balm to the
wound. Unlike Vipassana, where bodily sensations are the focus, Metta meditation
centers on cultivating feelings of happiness and loving-kindness, and using this
feeling as the object of meditation. To be honest, I felt Goenka fell terribly
short on this method.

[![Guided Metta Meditation](https://img.youtube.com/vi/XxJFum2RYIs/default.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XxJFum2RYIs)

Initially, the Goenka's chanting during the Metta session felt reminiscent of
familiar Hindu traditions, but the mourning tone disrupted my meditation,
prompting me to return to Vipassana. Yet, when others were practising Vipashana
in silence, I found myself naturally gravitating towards Metta using Bante's
technique.

As I immersed myself in Metta, I experienced a profound shift. Uttering the
phrase "Sarveeshaam svasthir bavathu"[^3] in my mind with pure intentions, I was
overwhelmed by a surge of pleasant sensations, accompanied by tears. This
persisted for over 2 minutes. However, this experience, though initially
euphoric, soon gave way to discomfort as it moved my focus away from the feeling
of happiness. Was this rush of sensations a manifestation of dissatisfaction? I
couldn't be certain.

As I alternated between focusing on happiness and grappling with distractions, I
realized the cycle was exhausting and frustrating. The hindrances pulled me away
from my intended focus, leaving me feeling drained.

Reflecting on these experiences, I grappled with uncertainty. Was my realization
about dissatisfaction a genuine insight or merely a product of confirmation
bias? The ambiguity lingered, underscoring the complexities of the meditative
journey and the challenges of discerning truth amidst subjective experiences.

## Day 11

As the retreat drew to a close, I emerged from the cocoon of silence and
solitude, reentering the noisy outside world. Yet, within me, I carried the
profound stillness, the timeless wisdom, and the promise of inner
transformation. It's quite impossible to catch the butterflies when you try
hard. When you take a few moments to relax and just observe what's going on and
the butterflies will sit all over you. Good things in life are like these
butterflies.

## Body Statistics

My body felt like it was beaten to pulp after long sits for 10 days. I slept
well upon reaching home, and meditated in the evening. The next day upon waking
up at 5 am, I checked my HRV (using Polar H10) and it had slumped from 68 to 47,
by 21 points. However the resting heart rate had improved from 60 to 47. My work
out numbers were miserable than ever as I had regressed severely. I'm hoping
that it will improve over the next two weeks.

**Exercise**|**March 27, 2024**|**April 23, 2024**
:-----:|:-----:|:-----:
Jump ropes|Easy 300 x 2 sets|Struggled to complete 200 x 1 set
Pull ups|30 lb weighted, 10 reps x 3 sets|normal, 8 reps x 2 sets
Push ups|20 reps x 3 sets|20 reps
Squats|195 lb x 5 reps x 2 sets|110 lb x 3 reps x 1 set

## Conclusion

Life unfolds in its own way, yet our minds often impulsively react to its twists
and turns. Retreats like this offer an opportunity to rewire our responses,
fostering mindful reactions imbued with genuine peace and wholesomeness,
regardless of the circumstances. In conclusion, I wholeheartedly recommend such
retreats to anyone seeking to enrich their lives and cultivate emotional
well-being. For the most profound journey is not one of external discovery, but
rather an introspective voyage into the depths of our own consciousness. True
happiness is found not in reaching a destination, but in cherishing the moments
along the way. Embrace this journey fully!

Until next time, may you find peace, harmony, and boundless happiness.

## Footnotes

[^1]: [MCTB audiobook on SoundCloud](https://on.soundcloud.com/wbp84)

[^2]: `Aasanaa` means posture and `yOgA` means meditation, aka, being in union
    with yourself, not the body stretches as advertized by the western yoga studios.

[^3]: Here is the complete shlokam in Sanskrit along with its English meaning.
    Translate it into your mother tongue and recite it peacefully to experience the
    true happiness within you.

    ---

    Sarveeshaam swastir bhavathu

    Sarveeshaam shaantir bhavathu

    Sarveeshaam puurnam bhavathu

    Sarveeshaam mangalam bhavathu

    ---

    May there be good health and well-being in everything.

    May there be peacefulness in everything.

    May there be completeness in everything.

    May there be happiness, joy and blissfulness in everything.

    ---

    I highly recommend finding "your hymn/shlokam" in your mother tongue rather
    than in a foreign language that may not resonate deeply within you. Personally,
    I don't subscribe to the belief that words hold power when their absolute
    meaning is unknown. Chanting in a foreign language often fails to evoke the
    profound feeling of happiness within me. For me, the true resonance comes from
    hymns or shlokas in Tamil or Sanskrit, languages that hold a deep cultural and
    spiritual significance for me.

    I find that chanting in Hindi/Pali or in the manner of Goenka's mournful tune
    lacks the genuine connection I seek. As Goenka himself might say, the mental
    volition may be strong, but the execution falls short. Ultimately, it's the
    wholesome feelings invoked by the chant that hold greater importance than the
    words themselves.